It's dawn, 626 AD.
Constantinople
is awake
because it has to be.
On one shore of the Bosphorus, Persian
banners. On the other, Avar drums and
Slavic boats sliding towards the sea
walls.
The richest city on Earth has nowhere
left to retreat. Its back is to the
water.
This wasn't some sudden barbarian
miracle.
This siege was built year by year by
exhausted treasuries, bad timing, and
one Eastern war that refused to stay
manageable.
This is not just another Roman-Persian
War.
It's the last one.
After centuries of bloodshed, after
generations of emperors and kings
trading cities, burning frontier forts,
and fighting tens of battles across the
same haunted border, this final war will
end with an era collapsing in real time.
To see how Rome ended [music] up
fighting for its capital beneath its own
walls, we have to start earlier when the
empire was already bleeding again.
The reign of Justin II
had seen the Roman Empire come under
pressure from all of its major frontiers
at a time when it was still recovering
from the high cost of the wars fought
under Justinian, leading to the loss of
territory in the West. While the West
became more stable under his successor
Tiberius II, however, it would be the
wars in the East with Persia and in the
Balkans against the Avars and Slavs that
would prove most decisive, leading to a
climatic siege fought beneath the walls
of Constantinople itself.
The reign of Maurice.
The Emperor Tiberius II's reign would
primarily be characterized by the many
military campaigns fought from 578 AD
onward, when he formally succeeded
Justin as Augustus.
Over the next 4 years, there were
continued campaigns against the Avars,
who took Sirmium in 582 AD, as well as
the Persians, where the general Maurice
continued to be victorious and even
advanced up to the vicinity of
Ctesiphon.
That same year, however, Tiberius fell
ill and died and was succeeded by
Maurice, whom he had promoted to
Augustus the day before his death.
In addition to being an experienced and
skilled soldier, Maurice also reformed
the administration of the Western
provinces by creating the position of
Exarch in Italy and Africa, who combined
the civil and military duties together,
which proved to be an effective way to
manage the West. He is also famous for
writing the military manual called the
Strategicon, offering advice on the
army's function and how to combat the
enemies it faced.
After coming to power, Maurice
personally led an army against the Avars
in the Balkans, the first Roman emperor
in over a century to take to the field
in person.
This aggressive strategy proved
successful, and by 587 AD, the Avars and
their Slavic allies had been defeated
for the time being, allowing Maurice to
focus on Persia.
This war would gradually start to shift
in Rome's favor after major victories in
Mesopotamia and Lazica in 589 AD, as
well as a Persian civil war which
erupted in 590 AD, which saw King
Hormizd deposed by the general Bahram.
Hormizd's son, Khosrow II, was then able
to secure direct military support from
Maurice, allowing him to reclaim his
throne in 591 AD, leading to Bahram's
death.
The Romans were able to extract
considerable concessions from Khosrow,
who now owed his kingship to Maurice,
[music] leading not just to the empire
regaining all of its lost territory, but
also dominance of the Caucasus, where
the Persians ceded control of large
amounts of territory.
This victory allowed Maurice to refocus
his attention on the Balkans in 593 AD,
where the Romans won several victories
over the Avars and Slavs over the
following years.
But despite his many successes, Maurice
found his standing in the empire
gradually declining in large part due to
his attempts to cut back on high
expenditure on the army, until in 602
AD, a general named Phocas led a
rebellion against him and was proclaimed
emperor by the troops at the Danube.
Maurice fled the capital, but was soon
tracked down and killed by Phocas'
troops alongside his entire family.
Civil war and invasion.
Unfortunately for Rome, Phocas was
unable to rally universal support in the
empire, and from the beginning, he was
faced with civil wars. This began in 602
AD, when the general Narses in
Mesopotamia refused to recognize the
usurper as emperor and revolted,
claiming that the son of Maurice, known
as Theodosius, was still alive. Though
the figure propped up as this imperial
heir proved to be an impostor.
Narses also requested support from
Khosrow, who quickly decided to take
advantage of this lapse in Roman
strength to invade, ostensibly in
support of Theodosius and to avenge his
patron Maurice.
Khosrow defeated a Roman army at
Constantia, who made further progress
into Roman Mesopotamia in 604 AD,
capturing the fortress of Dara.
Narses was also convinced by another
Roman commander to seek reconciliation
with Phocas. But despite being promised
mercy, he was executed by the emperor
upon arriving at Constantinople.
Phocas's popularity had, however,
declined, leading to a rebellion against
him in 608 AD, this time from the exarch
in Africa, a man named Heraclius.
The civil war quickly spread to the
Roman East, where Phocas's loyalists
transferred troops from Mesopotamia to
Egypt to repel an invasion from troops
loyal to Heraclius, who seized the
province in 609 AD after a hard-fought
campaign.
This withdrawal of troops from the East,
combined with the subsequent civil war,
severely weakens the frontier and
allowed the Persians to conquer
Mesopotamia and virtually all of Armenia
by 610 AD. That same year, the elder
Heraclius also abruptly died before he
could seize the throne, but his son,
also named Heraclius, was able to carry
on the rebellion and soon arrived in
Constantinople in person.
Phocas's support had almost completely
collapsed, and he was swiftly captured
and beheaded.
Heraclius' greatest concern was now the
Persian invasion with the eastern
frontier having been left in a
disastrous state.
He attempted to negotiate peace with
Khosrow, but the Persian king's
confidence was by now soaring, and he
refused. Khosrow's initial aims in the
war are not very clear and may well have
been limited to taking advantage of
Roman weakness to gain wealth and
prestige. However, [music] with the
Romans crippled by infighting and his
invasion more successful than he
expected, Khosrow's ambitions also
increased, and he now began to push more
aggressively into Roman territory
threatening Anatolia in 610 AD.
Elsewhere, the war continues to go
poorly for Rome, and between 611 and 619
AD, the Persians were able to conquer
the Caucasus, Levant, and Egypt meeting
little effective resistance.
In a symbolic blow, the True Cross was
even taken from Jerusalem as a trophy to
the Persian capital of Ctesiphon.
With the rest of the Roman East now
entirely under Persian control, the
front became focused in Anatolia where
the Persians had pushed all the way up
to Chalcedon.
Starting in 622 AD, Heraclius busied
himself in reconstituting the imperial
army, transferring troops from the
Balkans to reinforce the eastern army.
Unfortunately for Rome, the conflict
with the Avars had also resumed,
>> [music]
>> and Heraclius' attempts to personally
negotiate with their Khagan in 623 AD
ended in failure as the Avars instead
ambushed the Roman delegation.
In the east, however, the Romans were
finally seeing signs of progress as
Heraclius' reorganized forces were able
to bring stability on the Anatolian
frontier over the next few years,
winning several victories. Meanwhile,
there was also some ongoing conflict in
the West where the Visigoths resumed
their attacks in Spain and led to the
empire finally losing control of its
Spanish province in 624 AD. Heraclius'
true concern, however, remained in the
East where the war was entering a new
stage.
The Siege of Constantinople.
The Avars and the Persians were now both
determined to strike at the heart of the
Roman Empire, the capital of
Constantinople.
In 626 AD, the Avars placed the city
under siege, bringing Constantinople
under direct attack for the first time.
Simultaneously,
a Persian army under the general
Shahrbaraz was encamped across the
Strait of Bosphorus
>> [music]
>> at Chalcedon and poised to assist the
siege. The Avar army reportedly numbered
up to 80,000 men, which included their
Slav allies. Heraclius was not
personally in Constantinople at [music]
the time, instead being with the main
Roman field army in Anatolia, leaving
the defense of the city in the hands of
the magister officiorum Bonus and the
patriarch Sergius with a large garrison
including 12,000 cavalry.
As dire as the situation appeared for
the Romans, Constantinople was a
formidable city to besiege. The capital
was built on a peninsula guarded by sea
walls and the Roman navy, while the
approach on land was guarded by a series
of layered fortifications known as the
Theodosian Walls.
The siege began with the Avars building
several towers and battering rams and
preventing the Romans from foraging for
food, as well as constructing a wall of
their own to pin the defenders inside.
All the while, the Roman garrison
launched sorties to disrupt the Avar
lines. On the city walls, Sergius was
personally inspiring the defenders and
placed several icons of the Virgin Mary
along the defenses to bolster morale.
Once the Avar preparations were
complete, they launched their first
assault supported by artillery, siege
towers, and rams across the entire
length of the Theodosian Walls. But
despite several hours of fighting, they
failed to breach the city's formidable
defenses.
The following day, the Avars regrouped
and [music] launched another attack, but
this similarly failed to make any
headway. On the fourth day of the siege,
the Slavs attempted to breach the
defenses by sea, embarking a large
contingent aboard rafts [music] and
making an assault upon the section of
the city known as the Golden Horn. But
this attack, too, was [music] repelled
by the Roman navy.
While the Avars had yet to make any
progress, they had recently been able to
communicate directly with Shahrbaraz in
Chalcedon, and plans were in motion to
bring Persian reinforcements to the
other side of the strait.
However, these troops were intercepted
and crushed by the Roman [music] navy.
The Avars then launched another massive
assault on the city walls, while at the
same time their Slavic allies attempted
a second amphibious assault on the
Golden Horn.
The attack ended in disaster, as the
Roman navy once again intercepted the
Slavs, while on land the Avars failed to
breach the defenses. This proved to be
the turning point of [music] the siege
as the Avars decided to abandon the
operation and begin a withdrawal.
Constantinople had survived its first,
[music] but by no means last, siege.
Aftermath.
This great victory led to the Romans
being able to seize the initiative in
the war and start to push the Persians
back in Anatolia.
The Persians were dealt a further blow
when Heraclius intercepted a Persian
messenger carrying orders from Khosrow
to execute Shahrbaraz, which the emperor
chose to reveal to him, leading to one
of the king's best generals rebelling.
At the same time, Heraclius was able to
negotiate a new alliance with the Turks,
after which he launched the war's
decisive campaign in 627 AD, later
defeating the Persians at Nineveh.
Facing little resistance, Heraclius
captured the royal palace at Dastagerd,
where he also recovered over 300
captured military standards.
Khosrow's campaign of conquest had
turned into a disaster and faced with a
resurgent Roman Empire and Shahrbaraz's
revolt, the king was deposed and
executed by his son Kavad II
in 628 AD, who quickly started to
negotiate a peace treaty with Heraclius,
but he fell ill and died the following
year and was succeeded by his son
Ardashir III,
who was merely a boy. This left Persia
with even weaker leadership and exposed
it to the rebellious Shahrbaraz, who
made a separate peace agreement with
Heraclius during a meeting in Armenia in
exchange for Roman support. Shahrbaraz
then marched on Ctesiphon and had the
young Ardashir killed in 630 AD.
The peace treaty that followed proved
greatly favorable to Rome as Shahrbaraz
surrendered all captured Roman territory
back to the empire as well as the true
cross while also [music] recognizing the
frontiers established in 591 AD.
Rome had managed to [music] fight its
way to victory after decades of warfare,
but the cost had been high. The Roman
military was still heavily depleted
while the empire's administration would
largely need to be rebuilt. In Persia,
the situation was similar as its
military had been seriously mauled while
its leadership was weakened by a series
of usurpations. Even Shahrbaraz was
deposed and killed just two months into
his reign after which the Persians would
be further distracted [music]
by a spate of civil wars over the next
few years. That was until the young
Yazdegerd III assumed power in 632 AD.
What would prove to be the last
Roman-Persian War had come to an end.
But soon, both empires would be
confronted by a new military power
rising from the Arabian Peninsula.
If you'd like to help us keep creating
and get early access to our videos,
behind-the-scenes content, and other
perks, consider becoming a member right
here on YouTube or joining us on
Patreon. Every bit of support helps and
as always, thank you so much for
watching.